Pacman  is an arcade game developed by Namco and first released in Japan on May 22, 1980. It was created by Japanese video game designer Toru Iwatani. It was licensed for distribution in the United States by Midway and released in October 1980. Immensely popular from its original release to the present day, Pac-Man is considered one of the classics of the medium, virtually synonymous with video games, and an icon of 1980s popular culture.
Pacman is so well known, that just hearing the start up theme will make anyone instantly say "Oh hey! That's Pacman's theme!"
When Pac-Man was released, the most popular arcade video games were space shooters, in particular Space Invaders and Asteroids. The most visible minority were sports games that were mostly derivatives of Pong. Pac-Man succeeded by creating a new genre.
Pac-Man is often credited with being a landmark in video game history, and is among the most famous arcade games of all time, and is also one of the highest-grossing video games of all time, having generated more than $2.5 billion in quarters by the 1990s.

Pacman is played by moving Pacman around the field, trying to collect all the pellets. Once all the pellets are collected, you win that round, and go onto the next round.
Pacman's only obstical are 4 ghosts called Blinky, Pinky, Inky and Clyde. Blinky is Red, Pinky is Pink, Inky is Orange, and Clyde is Blue. If one of these ghosts touch Pac-Man, Pacman whithers into himself, and a life is lost.

The red ghost (Blinky) chases Pac-Man, and the pink ghost (Pinky) tries to position themselves in front of Pacman's mouth. The orange ghost (Inky) has a very peculiar pattern, as he tends to be random, but can also chase Pacman, in the same fashion as the red ghost (Blinky) does. However, the orange ghost (Inky) tends to stay in the lower left corner of the screen. Finally, the blue ghost (Clyde), as his name implies, is very, very random. The blue ghost (Clyde) generally just does whatever he wants to, and doesn't have any desire to go after Pacman. If Pacman were to go anywhere near the blue ghost (Clyde), the blue ghost would just carry on like nothing was wrong.
